XX.
The Minister in a Maze.
As the minister departed, in advance of Hester Prynne and Little Pearl, he threw a backward
glance, half expecting that he should discover only some faintly traced features or outline
of the mother and the child, slowly fading into the twilight of the woods.
So great of a sictitude of his life could not at once be received as real.
But there was Hester, clad in her grey robe, still standing beside the tree trunk, which
some blast had overthrown a long antiquity ago, and which time had ever since been covering
with moss, so that these two fated ones, with earth's heaviest burden on them, might there
sit down together and find a single hour's rest and solace.
And there was Pearl too, lightly dancing from the margin of the brook, now that the intrusive
third person was gone and taking her old place by her mother's side.
So the minister had not fallen asleep and dreamed.
In order to free his mind from this indistinctness and duplicity of impression which vexed it
with a strange disquietude, he recalled and more thoroughly defined the plans which Hester
and himself had sketched for their departure.
It had been determined between them that the old world, with its crowds and cities, offered
them a more eligible shelter and concealment than the wilds of New England or all America,
with its alternatives of an Indian wigwam where the few settlements of Europeans scattered
thinly along the seaboard.
Not to speak of the clergyman's health, so inadequate to sustain the hardships of a forest
life, his native gifts, his culture, and his entire development would secure him a home
only in the midst of civilization and refinement.
The higher the state, the more delicately adapted to it the man.
In furtherance of this choice, it so happened that a ship lay in the harbor, one of those
unquestionable cruisers frequent at that day, with, without being absolutely outlaws of
the deep, yet roamed over its surface with a remarkable irresponsibility of character.
This vessel had recently arrived from the Spanish main, and within three days' time
would sail for Bristol.
Hester Prynne, whose vocation, as a self-enlisted sister of charity, had brought her acquainted
with the captain and crew, could take upon herself to secure the passage of two individuals
and a child with all the secrecy which circumstances rendered more than desirable.
The minister had inquired of Hester, with no little interest, the precise time at which
the vessel might be expected to depart.
It would probably be on the fourth day from the present.
This is most fortunate, he had said to himself, now, why the Reverend Mr. Dimseyle considered
it so very fortunate we hesitate to reveal.
Nevertheless, to hold nothing back from the reader, it was because, on the third day from
the present, he was to preach the election sermon, and, as such an occasion formed an
honorable epoch in the life of a New England clergyman, he could not have chanced upon
a more suitable mode and time of terminating his professional career.
At last they shall say of me, thought this exemplary man, that I leave no duty unperformed
or ill-performed.
Sad, indeed, that an introspection so profound and acute as this poor minister's should be
so miserably deceived.
We have had, and may still have, worse things to tell of him, but none, we apprehend, so
pitably weak, no evidence, at once so slight and irrefragable, of a subtle disease that
had long since begun to eat into the real substance of his character.
No man, for any considerable period, can wear one face to himself and another to the multitude,
without finally getting bewildered as to which may be the true.
The excitement of Mr. Dimseyle's feelings as he returned from his interview with Hester
lent him an unaccustomed physical energy, and hurried him townward at a rapid pace.
The pathway along the woods seemed wilder, more uncouth with its rude natural obstacles,
and less trodden by the foot of man than he remembered it on his outward journey.
But he leaped across the plashy places, thrust himself through the clinging underbrush, climbed
the ascent, plunged into the hollow, and overcame, in short, all of the difficulties of the track,
with an unwaryable activity that astonished him.
He could not but recall how feebly, and with what frequent pauses for breath, he had toiled
over the same ground only two days before.
As he drew near the town, he took an impression of change from the series of familiar objects
that presented themselves.
It seemed not yesterday, not one, not two, but many days, or even years ago, since he
had quitted them.
There indeed was each former trace of the street as he remembered it, and all the peculiarities
of the house, with the due multitude of gabled peaks, and a weathercock at every point where
his memory suggested one.
Not the less, however, came this importunately obtrusive sense of change.
The same was true as regarded the acquaintances whom he met, and all the well-known shapes
of human life, about the little town.
They looked neither old nor young now.
The beards of the aged were no whiter, nor could the creeping babe of yesterday walk
on his feet today.
It was impossible to describe in what respect they differed from the individuals on whom
he had so recently bestowed a parting glance.
And yet the minister's deepest sense seemed to inform him of their mutability.
A similar impression struck him most remarkably as he passed under the walls of his own church.
The edifice had so very strange, and yet so familiar an aspect, that Mr. Dimmesdale's
mind vibrated between two ideas, either that he had seen it only in a dream hitherto, or
that he was merely dreaming about it now.
This phenomenon, in the various shapes which it assumed, indicated no external change,
but so sudden and important a change in the spectator of the familiar scene that the intervening
space of a single day had operated on his consciousness like the lapse of years.
The minister's own will, and Hester's will, and the fate that grew between them, had wrought
this transformation.
It was the same town as Heretofore, but the same minister returned not from the forest.
He might have said to the friends who greeted him, I am not the man for whom you take me.
I left him yonder in the forest, withdrawn into a secret dell by a mossy tree-trunk and
near a melancholy brook.
Go seek your minister, and see if his emaciated figure, his thin cheek, his white, heavy,
pain-wrinkled brow, be not flung down there like a cast-off garment.
His friends, no doubt, would still have insisted with him, Thou art thyself the man!
But this error would have been their own, not his.
Before Mr. Dimmesdale reached home, his inner man gave him other evidences of a revolution
in the sphere of thought and feeling.
In truth, nothing short of a total change of dynasty and moral code in that interior
kingdom was adequate to account for the impulses now communicated to the unfortunate and startled
minister.
At every step he was incited to do something strange, wild, wicked thing or other, with
at once, involuntary and intentional, in spite of himself, yet growing out of a profounder
self than that which opposed the impulse.
For instance, he met one of his own deacons.
The good old man addressed himself with the paternal affection and patriarchal privilege
which his venerable age, his upright and holy character, and his station in the church entitled
him to use, and, conjoined with this, the deep, almost worshipping respect which the
minister's professional and private claims alike demanded.
Never was there a more beautiful example of how the majesty of age and wisdom may comport
with this obscenes and respect enjoined upon it, as from the lower social rank and inferior
order of endowment towards a higher.
Now, during a conversation of some two or three moments between the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale
and this excellent and hoary-bearded deacon, it was only by the most careful self-control
that the former could refrain from uttering certain blasphemous suggestions that rose
into his mind, respecting the communion supper.
He absolutely trembled and turned pale as ashes, lest his tongue should wag itself
in utterance of these horrible matters, and plead his own consent for so doing without
his having fairly given it, and, even with this terror in his heart, he could hardly
avoid laughing to imagine how the sanctified old patriarchal deacon would have been petrified
by his minister's impiety.
Again, another incident of the same nature.
Hurrying along the street, the Reverend Dimmesdale encountered the eldest female member of his
church, a most pious and exemplary old dame, poor, widowed, lonely, and with a heart full
of reminisces about her dead husband and children, and her dead friends of long ago, as a burial
ground is full of stored gravestones.
Yet all this, which would else have been such heavy sorrow, was made almost a solemn joy
to her devout old soul by religious consolations and the truth of scripture, wherewith she
had fed herself continually for more than thirty years, and since Mr. Dimmesdale had
taken her in charge, the good grandam's chief earthly comfort, which, unless it had been
likewise a heavenly comfort, could have been none at all, was to meet her pastor, with
her casually or of set purpose, and be refreshed with a word of warm, fragrant, heaven-breathing
gospel truth from his beloved lips into her dulled but rapturously attentive ear.
But on this occasion, up to the moment of putting his lips to the old woman's ear,
Mr. Dimmesdale, as the great enemy of souls would have it, could recall no text of scripture,
nor aught else, except a brief pithy and, as it then appeared to him, unanswerable argument
against the immortality of the human soul.
The instillment thereof into her mind would probably have caused this aged sister to drop
dead at once, as by the effect of an intensely poisonous infusion.
What he really did whisper, the minister could never afterwards recollect.
There was perhaps a fortunate disorder in his utterance, which failed to impart any
distinct idea to the good widow's comprehension, or which Providence interpreted after a method
of its own.
Assuredly, as the minister looked back, he beheld an expression of divine gratitude and
ecstasy that seemed like the shine of a the celestial city on her face, so wrinkled and
ashy pale.
Again, a third instance, after parting from the old church member, he met the youngest
sister of them all.
It was a maiden newly won, and won by the reverend Mr. Dimmesdale's own sermon, on
the Sabbath after his vigil, to barter the transitory pleasures of the world for the
heavenly hope that was to assume brighter substance as life grew dark around her, and
which would gild the utter gloom with final glory.
She was fair and pure, as a lily that had bloomed in paradise.
The minister knew well that he was himself enshrined with the stainless sanctity of her
heart, which hung its snowy curtains about his image, imparting to religion the warmth
of love, and to love a religious purity.
Satan that afternoon had surely led the poor young girl away from her mother's side, and
thrown her into the pathway of this sorely tempted, or, shall we not rather say, this
lost and desperate man.
As she drew nigh, the archfiend whispered him to condense into small compass, and drop
into her tender bosom a germ of evil that would be sure to blossom darkly soon, and
bear black fruit at times.
Such was his sense of power over this virgin soul, trusting him as she did, that the minister
felt potent to blight all the fields of innocence with but one wicked look, and develop all
its opposite with but a word.
So with a mightier struggle than he had yet sustained, he held his Jennifer cloak before
his face, and hurried onward, making no sign of recognition, and leaving the young sister
to digest his rudeness as she might.
She ransacked her conscience, which was full of harmless little matters, like her pocket
or her work-bag, and took herself to task, poor thing, for a thousand imaginary faults,
and went about her household duties with swollen eyelids the next morning.
Before the minister had time to celebrate his victory over this last temptation, he
was conscious of another impulse, more ludicrous and almost as horrible.
It was, we blush to tell it, it was to stop short in the road, and teach some very wicked
words to a knot of little Puritan children, who were playing there, and had just begun
to talk.
Denying himself this freak, as unworthy of his cloth, he met a drunken seaman, one of
the ship's crew from the Spanish main.
And here, since he had so valiantly forebode all other wickedness, poor Mr. Dimmesdale
longed at last to shake hands with this tarry black guard, and recreate himself with a
few improper jests, such as dissolute sailors so abound with, and a volley of good, round,
solid, satisfactory, and heaven-defying oaths.
It was not so much a better principle, as partly his natural good taste, and still more
his buck-rammed habit of clerical decorum, that carried him safely through the latter
crisis.
"'What is it that hurts and tempts me thus?' cried the minister to himself at length, pausing
in the street, and striking his hand against his forehead.
"'Am I mad, or am I giving over utterly to the fiend?
Did I make a contract with him in the forest, and sign it with my blood?
And does he now summon me to its fulfilment, by suggesting the performance of every wickedness
which his most foul imagination can conceive?'
At the moment, when the reverend Mr. Dimmesdale thus communed with himself, and struck his
forehead with his hand, old Mistress Hibbins, the reputed witch-lady, is said to have been
passing by.
She made a very grand appearance, having on a high head-dress a rich gown of velvet, and
a rough done-up with a famous yellow starch, of which Anne Turner, her especial friend,
had taught her the secret, before the last good lady had been hanged for Sir Thomas Overbury's
murder.
Whether the witch had read the minister's thoughts or no, she came to a full stop, looking
shrewdly in his face, smiled craftily, and, though little given to converse with clergymen,
began a conversation.
"'So, reverend sir, you have made a visit into the forest,' observed the witch-lady,
nodding her high head-dress to him.
"'The next time, I pray, you allow me only a fair warning, and I shall be proud to bear
you company.
Without taking over much upon myself, my good word will go far towards gaining any strange
gentleman a fair reception from younger potente you want off.'
"'I profess, madam,' answered the clergyman, with a grave obscience, such as the lady's
rank demanded, and his own good breeding made imperative, "'I profess on my conscience
and character that I am utterly bewildered as touching the purport of your words.
I went not into the forest to seek a potentate.
Neither do I, at any future time, design a visit thither, with a view of gaining the
favour of such personage.
My one sufficient object was to greet that pious friend of mine, the apostle Elliot,
and rejoice with him over the many precious souls he hath won from heathen-dom.
"'Ha, ha, ha!' cackled the old witch-lady, still nodding her high head-dress at the minister.
"'Well, well, we must talk thus in the daytime.
You carry it off like an old hand, but at midnight in the forest we shall have other
talk together.'
She passed on with her aged stateliness, but often turning back her head and smiling at
him, like one willing to recognize a secret intimacy of connection.
"'Have I then sold myself,' thought the minister, to the fiend whom, if men say true,
this yellow-starched and velveted old hag has chosen for her prince and master?
The wretched minister!
He had made a bargain very like it.
Tempted by a dream of happiness, he had yielded himself with deliberate choice, as he had
never done before.
To what he knew was deadly sin, and the infectious poison of that sin had been thus rapidly diffused
throughout his moral system.
It had stupefied all blessed impulses, and awakened into vivid life the whole brotherhood
of bad ones.
Scorn, bitterness, unprovoked malignity, gratuitous desire of ill, ridicule of whatever was good
and holy, all awoke to tempt, even while they frightened him.
And his encounter with old mistress Hibbins, if it were a real incident, did but show its
sympathy and fellowship with wicked mortals, and the world of perverted spirits.
He had by this time reached his dwelling on the edge of the burial ground, and, hastening
up the stairs, took refuge in his study.
The minister was glad to have reached this shelter without first betraying himself to
the world by any of those strange and wicked eccentricities to which he had been continually
impelled while passing through the streets.
He entered the accustomed room and looked around him on its books, its windows, its
fireplace, and the tapestrid comfort of the walls, with the same perception of strangeness
that had haunted him throughout his walk from the forest dell into the town and thitherward.
Here he had studied and written.
Here gone through fast and vigil, and come forth half alive.
Here striven to pray.
Here borne a hundred thousand agonies.
There was the Bible in its rich old Hebrew, with Moses and the prophets speaking to him,
and God's voice through all.
There on the table, with the inky pen beside it, was an unfinished sermon, with a sentence
broken in the midst, where his thoughts had ceased to gush upon the page two days before.
He knew that it was himself, the thin and white-cheeked minister, who had done and suffered
these things, and written thus far into the election sermon.
But he seemed to stand apart and eye this former self with scornful pity, but half envious
curiosity.
That self was gone.
Another man had returned out of the forest, a wiser one, with a knowledge of hidden mysteries
which the simplicity of the former never could have reached, a bitter kind of knowledge that.
While occupied with these reflections, a knock came at the door of the study, and the minister
said, Come in, not wholly devoid of an idea that he might behold an evil spirit.
And so he did.
It was old Roger Chillingworth that entered.
The minister stood white and speechless, with one hand on the Hebrew scriptures, and the
other spread upon his breast.
Welcome home, reverend sir, said the physician.
And how found you that godly man, the apostle Elliot?
But methinks, dear sir, you look pale, as if the travel through the wilderness had been
too sore for you.
Will not my aid be requisite to put you in heart and strength to preach your election
sermon?
Nay, I think not so, rejoined the reverend Mr. Dimmesdale.
My journey and the sight of the holy apostle yonder, and the free air which I have breathed,
have done me good, after so long confinement in my study.
I think to need no more of your drugs, my kind physician, good though they be, and administered
by a friendly hand.
At this time Roger Chillingworth was looking at the minister with the grave and intent
regard of a physician towards his patient.
But in spite of this outward show, the latter was almost convinced of the old man's knowledge,
or at least his confident suspicion, with respect to his own interview with Hester Prynne.
The physician knew then that in the minister's regard he was no longer a trusted friend,
but his bitterest enemy.
So much being known, it would appear natural that a part of it should be expressed.
It is singular, however, how long a time often passes before words embody things, and with
what security two persons, who chose to avoid a certain subject, may approach its very verge
and retire without disturbing it.
Thus the minister felt no apprehension that Roger Chillingworth would touch and express
words upon the real position which they sustained towards one another.
Yet did the physician, in his dark way, creep frightfully near the secret.
Were it not better, he said, that you use my poor skill tonight, verily dear sir, we
must take pains to make you strong and vigorous for this occasion of the election discourse.
The people look for great things from you, apprehending that another year may come about
and find their master gone.
Yes, to another world replied the minister, with pious resignation, heaven granted that
better one, for, in good sooth, I hardly think to tarry with my flock through the fleeting
seasons of another year.
But touching your medicine, kind sir, in my present frame of body, I need it not.
I joy to hear it, administered the physician.
It may be that my remedies, so long administered in vain, begin now to take due effect.
Happy man were I, and well deserving of New England's gratitude, could I achieve this
cure.
I thank you from my heart, most watchful friend, said Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale, with a solemn
smile.
I thank you, and can but requite your good deeds with my prayers.
A good man's prayers are golden recompense, rejoined old Roger Chillingworth, as he took
his leave.
Yea, they are the current gold coin of the New Jerusalem, with the King's own mint mark
on them.
Left alone, the minister summoned a servant of the house, and requested food, which, being
set before him, he ate with ravenous appetite.
Then flinging the already written pages of the election sermon into the fire, he forthwith
began another, which he wrote with such an impulsive flow of thought and emotion, that
he fancied himself inspired, and only wondered that heaven should see fit to transmit the
grand and solemn music of its oracles through so foul an organ-pipe as he.
However, leaving that mystery to solve itself, or go unsolved for ever, he drove his task
onward with earnest haste and ecstasy.
Thus the night fled away, as if it were a winged steed, and he careering on it.
Morning came and peeped, blushing, through the curtains, and at last sunrise through
a golden beam into the study, and laid it right across the minister's bedazzled eyes.
There he was, with the pen still between his fingers, and a vast immeasurable tract of
written space behind him.